---
layout: post
title: '3 Questions About Whether Or Not To Automate'
author: aleksa 
categories:
  [implementation, automation, integration]
image: assets/images/questions1.jpeg
featured: true
---

_If you find yourself answering “yes” to these questions, it may be time to consider automating critical processes at your organization. If you find yourself answering “no”, then it may not be worth the investment in automation–especially if these processes are still in flux._

#### To date, Open Function Group has worked with 43 social sector organizations worldwide that operate across many sectors including health, education, agriculture, livelihoods, and emergency response. 
These organizations leveraged [OpenFn](https://openfn.org) to drive efficiency and scale processes, implementing integration and automation to deliver digital systems that work better, faster, and together. 
 
Over the last 6 years, OpenFn has been implemented for a wide range of use cases, including building real-time data monitoring systems, streamlining data cleaning pipelines, securely exchanging sensitive information, and automating routine processes like uploading indicator results, sending SMS/email alerts, or making mobile payments. (Read more about [OpenFn solutions](https://openfn.org/solutions).) By connecting any app, OpenFn can integrate and automate all apps across a digital ecosystem. However, just because you can integrate and automate — should you? 
 
While integration and automation have the potential to enable scale and save time and money (we’ve learned this from our [partners](https:openfn.org/clients)), solutions require investment to set up and maintain. These costs sometimes outweigh expected efficiency gains and service outcomes. Therefore, when helping organizations to evaluate the cost-benefit of investing in automation and integration solutions, we at Open Function Group typically ask 3 key questions: 

1. **Security — Will automation limit the exposure of sensitive data?**

Can the exposure of sensitive data be limited by integrating with secure API endpoints (rather than relying on human beings to interact with those data, for example)? Or by automating a data cleaning process? 

2. **Accuracy — Will automation increase data accuracy and reduce data entry errors?**

Can the process take place more reliably by limiting the opportunity for human error (in automating data manipulation or simple algorithmic work, for example)?

1. **Speed —  Will automation increase the speed of impact?**

Can the process be done more quickly via automation and is there value in having it done faster? (The answer to the first part is almost always yes, but sometimes there's not actually lots of value generated by doing something faster.)

#### If you find yourself answering “yes” to these questions, it may be time to consider automating critical processes at your organization. 
#### If you find yourself answering “no”, then it may not be worth the investment in automation–especially if these processes are still in flux. 

To learn more about how automation and integration can be implemented on OpenFn, reach out to our team at [admin@openfn.org.](mailto:admin@openfn.org_) Our team of ICT4D specialists are always happy to chat about your specific processes and help determine the total cost of ownership of automation solutions.  

[Sign up](https://openfn.org/signup) to set up an OpenFn project today, free of charge. Check out our [website](http://openfn.org) to learn more. 



