---
layout: post
title: 'To Automate Or Not To Automate? Ask Yourself These 3 Questions.'
author: aleksa
categories: [implementation, automation, integration]
image: assets/images/questions1.jpeg
featured: false
---

_Automation can save time, unlock critical resources, and enable scale–but it
typically requires investment to set up. Wondering whether you should automate
your processes? Ask yourself these 3 questions._

#### To date, Open Function Group has worked with 43 social sector organizations worldwide that operate across many sectors including health, education, agriculture, livelihoods, and emergency response.

These organizations implemented [OpenFn](https://openfn.org) to drive efficiency
and scale processes, leveraging integration and automation to deliver digital
systems that work better, faster, and together.

Over the last 6 years, OpenFn has been implemented for a wide range of use
cases, including building real-time data monitoring systems, streamlining data
cleaning pipelines, securely exchanging sensitive information, and automating
routine processes like uploading indicator results, sending SMS/email alerts, or
making mobile payments. (Read more about
[OpenFn solutions](https://openfn.org/solutions).) By connecting any app, OpenFn
can integrate and automate all apps across a digital ecosystem. However, a question that we frequently ask our partners is: **just because you _can_ integrate and automate—_should_ you?**

While integration and automation have the potential to enable scale and save
time and money (we’ve learned this from our
[partners](https:openfn.org/clients)), solutions require investment to set up
and maintain. These costs sometimes outweigh expected efficiency gains and
service outcomes. Therefore, when helping organizations to evaluate the
cost-benefit of investing in automation and integration solutions, we at Open
Function Group typically ask 3 key questions:

### 1. Security — Will automation limit the exposure of sensitive data?

Can the exposure of sensitive data be limited by integrating with secure API
endpoints (rather than relying on human beings to interact with those data, for
example)? Or by automating a data cleaning process?

### 2. Accuracy — Will automation increase data accuracy and reduce data entry errors?**

Can the process take place more reliably by limiting the opportunity for human
error (in automating data manipulation or simple algorithmic work, for example)?

### 3. Speed — Will automation increase the speed of impact?

Can the process be done more quickly via automation and is there value in having
it done faster? (The answer to the first part is almost always yes, but
sometimes there's not actually lots of value generated by doing something
faster.)

## If you find yourself answering “yes” to these questions, it may be time to consider automating critical processes at your organization.

If you find yourself answering “no”, then it may not be worth the investment in automation... yet. (This is true especially if these processes are still in flux.)

To learn more about how automation and integration can be implemented on OpenFn,
reach out to our team at [admin@openfn.org.](mailto:admin@openfn.org_). Our team
of ICT4D specialists is always happy to chat about your specific processes and
help determine the total cost of ownership of automation solutions.

[Sign up](https://openfn.org/signup) to try out OpenFn today, free of
charge. Check out our [website](http://openfn.org) to learn more about OpenFn.
